“The mind sent outside…is the origination of suffering.
The result of the mind sent outside…is suffering.
The mind seeing the mind…is the path.
The result of the mind seeing the mind…is the cessation of suffering.”
%
“Those who have awakened don’t talk of what they’ve awakened to, because it lies above
and beyond all words.”
%
“People these days suffer because of thoughts.”
%
“Watch the mind right at the mind.”
%
“Suffering is something to be comprehended. When you comprehend it, you let it go. Why
would you want to wear it?”
%
“Even if you’ve read the whole Canon and can remember lots of teachings; even
if you can explain them in poignant ways, with lots of people to respect you; even if
you build a lot of monastery buildings, or can explain inconstancy, stress, and not-
self in the most detailed fashion—if you‘re still heedless, you haven’t tasted the
flavor of the teachings in any way at all, for those other things are all external. The
purposes they serve are all external: as a benefit to society, a benefit to other people,
a benefit to posterity, or a symbol of the religion. The only thing that serves your
own true purpose is release from suffering.
“And you’ll be able to gain release from suffering only when you know the one mind.”
%
“Not worrying, not being attached: That’s the mental dwelling of those who practice.”
%
“When the mind isn’t still, you can at least make sure it doesn’t wander off far. Use your
mindfulness to stay mindful solely of the body. Look to see it as inconstant, stressful, and not-
self. Develop the perception of its being unattractive, with nothing of any substance to it at all.
When the mind sees clearly in this way, it will give rise to a sense of dismay, disenchantment,
and dispassion. This, too, can cut through the clinging-aggregates.”
%
“Whatever level a monk has reached, as far as I’m concerned he’s welcome to dwell there.
As for me, I dwell with knowing.”
“Knowing is the normalcy of mind that’s empty, bright, pure, that has stopped fabricating,
stopped searching, stopped all mental motions—having nothing, not attached to anything at
all.
%
“I ask you all to examine happiness, to see exactly where was the point of greatest
happiness in your life. When you really look at it, you’ll see that it’s just that—nothing more
than anything else you’ve ever experienced. Why wasn’t it more than that? Because the world
has nothing more than that. That’s all it has to offer—over and over again, nothing more than
that at all. Just birth, aging, illness, and death, over and over again. There’s got to be a
happiness more extraordinary than that, more excellent than that, safer than that. This is
why the noble ones sacrifice limited happiness in search of the happiness that comes from
stilling the body, stilling the mind, stilling the defilements. That’s the happiness that’s safe, to
which nothing else can compare.”
%